---
title: Craig Geddes
date: 2019-07-16 14:33:00 Z
published: false
---

Craig Geddes is the Senior Global Specialist for Education at DAI. Craig brings over 16 years’ experience working in both domestic and international markets focusing on government relations initiatives and development programs in education, protection, youth, gender and citizen advocacy.
Previous to DAI, Craig was the Senior Technical Advisor for Education and Protection for Plan USA where he was responsible for the technical management of US Government and corporate funded education and child protection programs that focused directly on improving literacy, school safety, social behavior change communication (SBCC), ‘extra mile education’, economics and child protection initiatives in Africa, South East Asia and Latin America.  Craig has also worked as the Global Program Manager for Literacy/Head of the READ Team for World Vision International overseeing the rollout of literacy programming in 15 countries. He has spent 11 of the last 16 years living overseas in the field in Zimbabwe and South Africa working in education, health and agriculture across the African continent. His most recent overseas post was as Chief of Party (CoP) for the DfID funded Girls Education Challenge (GEC) program, IGATE (Improving Girls Access through Transforming Education), a project focused on reducing the 9 greatest barriers to girls access to, and performance in, education. IGATE partnered with government, school leadership, community committees, religious bodies, parents and children themselves in creating a holistic, results based approach to education, transforming the lives of over 70,000 Zimbabweans. 
Craig was born in Zimbabwe to Scottish parents and emigrated to the US at a young age. He spent his childhood traveling frequently back to Southern Africa and on service trips to numerous countries in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean. On those trips is where he realized his true passion for equality, justice and a commitment to transformational development.  Craig is a graduate of The College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. 
Currently Craig is the Co-Chair for the Global Literacy Special Interest Group for the Comparative International Education Society (CIES) Conference, a trained Court Appointed Special Advocate for Children (CASA)/Guardian Ad Litem and has been a member of the USAID READ Act Consultative Working Group and the World Bank’s Literacy Inclusion Working Group. 
