---
title: DAI Publishes Review of U.S. Offshore Wind Local Content Requirements
date: 2022-09-03 15:54:00 Z
published: false
---

This is Placeholder copy for final news announcement
U.S. federal and state agencies are increasingly embedding local content requirements and incentives within the development of large-scale renewable development projects. With regard to the U.S. offshore wind (OSW) sector, this includes the federal-level leasing process and state-level power purchase competitions, as well as grants and tax incentives to stimulate the U.S. domestic workforce and supply chain development. Similar requirements are being deployed in the wider international OSW market, notably in the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Taiwan. Behind these local content requirements lies the new enthusiasm of governments for policies that leverage domestic industrial transformation and local “green jobs” as outcomes of capital investments in renewable energy projects.

<button data-tf-popup="OARosYGo" data-tf-iframe-props="title=Wind Energy Report Leads" data-tf-medium="snippet" style="all:unset;font-family:Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;display:inline-block;max-width:100%;white-space:nowrap;overflow:hidden;text-overflow:ellipsis;background-color:#DA4F25;color:#FFFFFF;font-size:20px;border-radius:7px;padding:0 33px;font-weight:bold;height:50px;cursor:pointer;line-height:50px;text-align:center;margin:0;text-decoration:none;">Request Report</button><script src="//embed.typeform.com/next/embed.js"></script>


This report provides a review of local content and economic benefit requirements for the U.S. OSW industry, both at the federal level and at state level, and discusses New Jersey as an example. Section 2 outlines key federal-level legislation on the requirements and incentives for domestic content. This includes the recently passed Inflation Reduction Act, the Jones Act, the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA), the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, and certain bills under deliberation in Congress. Specifically, we conclude that the Jones Act presents both a commercial and policy dilemma. On the one hand, the Act strongly promotes investment in the development of U.S. domestic shipping relevant to servicing the OSW sector, which in turn supports policies for green industrial growth and aligns with the Biden administration’s recent “build back better” policies. On the other hand, these home-built vessels are likely to add cost and risk to projects, which could potentially slow development of the overall U.S. OSW market and reduce inward investment from component manufacturers, jeopardizing the achievement of targets for renewable power to tackle climate change. 
Regarding requirements for local content in the federal sale of OSW leases, although the OCSLA has no explicit local content provisions, it requires that lease sales must generate outcomes that assure the protection of the United States’ national (energy) security interests and generate a fair economic return to the United States. These two principles are important because they appear to offer the United States an exemption under World Trade Organization (WTO) rules, which otherwise would prohibit preferences to domestic content due to their distortion of international trade and investment