---
title: Project-Supported Tunisian City Named a Frontrunner in Global Climate City
  Challenge
date: 2019-12-18 09:10:00 Z
published: false
solutions:
- Environment
regions: Middle East and North Africa
clients: European Commission
---

The city of Monastir, Tunisia, was recently named as one of the five frontrunners and role models for climate action in key sectors in the Global South. It qualifies—alongside Cotonou, Benin, Makindye, Uganda, Jambi, Indonesia, and Recife, Brazil)—for the next phase of the Global Climate City Challenge (GCCC), a partnership between the Global Covenant of Mayors and the European Investment Bank, endorsed by the European Commission. 

The frontrunner cities were announced at a special event at COP25, organised by the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy (GCoM), in the presence of Frans Timmermans - newly appointed Co-Chair of GCoM and European Commission Executive Vice-President for the European Green Deal, the EIB President, Werner Hoyer, former New York City mayor and Co-Chair and Co-Founder of GCoM, Michael Bloomberg, and UN-Habitat's Executive Director Ms. Maimunah Mohd Sharif.
The city of Monastir is looking at ways to integrate nature-based solutions to enhance resilience along the city’s coastal areas, which are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The Tunisian municipality is a partner-city covered by the EU-funded Clima-Med project in the South Mediterranean. The technical assistance project, implemented by DAI’s recently-acquired leading European development consultancy – Human Dynamics – works with national and local authorities form the MENA Region on the preparation of Sustainable Energy Access and Clime Action Plans, to raise their ambition to plan and define climate actions, and prepare bankable projects. 
In light of the planned City Climate Finance Gap Fund, which will provide funding to prepare pre-feasibility studies and other support at the early stages of project preparation, the recognition for Monastir in the GCCC sets forth the successful cooperation between the Clima-Med project and the municipality. It also shows the pivotal role cities have in the overall strategic approach of the Gap Fund to help donors identify what is really needed locally “to make bankable projects, improve the lives of local people, and tackle climate change”.
The five frontrunner cities, selected for their ambitious and potentially transformative urban climate projects, will now benefit from more preliminary project scoping work – urban finance and climate experts are now working with municipalities and their partners to get their projects off the ground. 
“I am a strong believer in sharing experiences between cities across the globe because the cities are the places where the biggest challenges are, but also the solutions are. [...]. The EU Green Deal is our way of showing a road map to be climate neutral as a continent by 2050,” said VP Frans Timmermans who attended COP25, just a day before the official announcement of the EU Green Deal in Brussels by the President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen. 
Werner Hoyer, President of the European Investment Bank, announced the bank’s vision to “move from 25% for climate landing purposes to 50% in 2025.” He continued saying that “in the period 2021 to 2030, the EIB wants to trigger an investment volume of 1.1 trillion dollars for climate action.” “We need to speed up, we need to gain time, and it is necessary that we join forces with cities”, said Mr. Hoyer. 
The former New York City Mayor, Co–Chair and Co-Founder of GCoM, Michael Bloomberg, said that there are more than 10,000 cities in the Global Covenant of Mayors, and together they are home to a huge number of promising ideas. Mr. Bloomberg called upon city leaders to work together as part of the global effort to stop climate change. “Cities account for the majority of the world’s population; the majority of carbon emissions. So, it is at the city level where begins with the impact, and when we work together, that impact has the power to stop climate change.”
“Monastir’s urban climate action was selected from 140 projects and 100 applicant cities. This is a huge recognition for us,” said Mondher Marzouk, the mayor of Monastir. He also stressed that “access to finance is instrumental to getting projects out of our pipeline and on to the ground.”
More about the Global Climate City Challenge 
The Global Climate City Challenge was launched in September 2018. The GCCC is part of an overall strategic approach to help cities realize their climate action ambition. It illustrates exactly why there is a need for the planned City Climate Finance Gap Fund, which will provide funding to prepare pre-feasibility studies and other support at the early stages of project preparation.
The new Cities Climate Finance Gap Fund was announced as part of the leadership in the Urban Climate Investment (LUCI) initiative launched in September at the United Nations Secretary General’s Climate Action Summit in New York by EIB President Hoyer. The Gap Fund is co-funded by Germany and Luxembourg and is co-developed with GCOM. 
https://www.eib.org/en/projects/sectors/urban-development/city-call-for-proposal/index.htm 
About the EU-funded Clima-Med project  
The Clima-Med project supports the transition of eight partner countries in the Southern Neighbourhood towards sustainable, low-carbon and climate-resilient development. The target beneficiaries covered by Clima-Med are governmental, local authorities and non-state actors in ENI south countries: Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Palestine and Tunisia.
While building trusted relationships with Southern Neighbourhood partners, the project’s objective is to improve climate change governance and support the mainstreaming of climate actions.
www.climamed.eu 
About the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy (GCoM)
GCoM is the largest global alliance for city climate leadership, uniting a global coalition of over 10,000 cities and local governments. In June 2016, Bloomberg Philanthropies and the European Commission, under the leadership of Vice President Maroš Šefčovič, merged the Covenant of Mayors with the Compact of Mayors to form the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy. The cities and partners of GCoM share a long-term vision of supporting voluntary action to combat climate change and moving towards a resilient and low-emission society. GCoM serves cities and local governments by mobilizing and supporting ambitious, measurable, planned climate and energy action in their communities by working with city/regional networks, national governments and other partners. Led today by Michael Bloomberg and European Commission Executive Vice President Frans Timmermans, the coalition comprises cities across 6 continents and 132 countries, representing over 800 million people or 10% of the global population. https://www.globalcovenantofmayors.org 