---
title: USAID Administrator Mark Green Visits Kosovo Governance Project
date: 2019-11-14 12:33:00 Z
published: false
---

USAID Administrator Praises the Work of DAI project in Kosovo 
USAID Administrator Mark Green, on November 12, 2019, during his stay in Kosovo visited the Municipality of Pristina, respectively the Procurement Office, to discuss the with the Mayor and the civil society representative developments in procurement and transparency. Mr. Green had the opportunity to learn more about the recent reforms in the local governance, improvements in procurement systems, including transparency and accountability. Opening of the public contracts, the increased usage of electronic procurement system, and increased cooperation with the civil society were the highlights of the meeting. All these achievements are as a result of DAI-implemented project in Kosovo, namely the Transparent, Effective, and Accountable Municipalities activity in Kosovo. Mr. Green highly appreciated municipality’s commitment and the project’s work to improve processes safeguarding public funds.
During the meeting, the Mayor of the Pristina Municipality, Shpend Ahmeti, while informing on the reforms, highlighted the impact and the support of the USAID Transparent, Effective, and Accountable Municipalities.  Mr. Ahmeti also shared his thoughts via social media by saying that he “…was pleased to welcome the Head of USAID, Mr. Mark Green, to the Municipality of Prishtina. We had the opportunity to discuss governance reforms, including procurement and transparency. We thank once again the TEAM project with whom we are working on a daily basis to establish systems to protect public money.”
Mr. Green also visited the upgraded archive and the office bid opening and evaluation, an investment co-financed by the Municipality of Pristina and DAI-implemented USAID Transparent, Effective and Accountable Municipalities activity in Kosovo. The new archiving system will help municipal procurement officers to secure and access procurement records, promoting the municipality’s ability to manage effectively their own documents and reducing the possibility that individuals could inappropriately access and tamper with procurement records. Similarly, new cameras installed in the procurement and archive offices increase the level of security for vital municipal records. New equipment for bid evaluation and bid opening helps the municipality to modernize and professionalize these key procurement processes. 
About USAID Transparent, Effective and Accountable Municipalities activity in Kosovo
DAI, through the Transparent, Effective and Accountable Municipalities activity in Kosovo, supports efforts of the Government of Kosovo to modernize public procurement and limit municipal vulnerability to corruption. By strengthening procurement processes and controls at the municipal level, the project helps local governments safeguard public funds and deliver better quality public services to citizens. The project works in partnership with municipalities, central government institutions, independent agencies, and civil society to achieve breakthrough change in procurement transparency and accountability.
